Add an initial security document (#2461)
open-telemetry/opentelemetry-collector: docs/security.md

# Security

The OpenTelemetry Collector defaults to operating in a secure manner, but is
configuration driven. This document captures important security aspects and

> considerations for the Collector.

Reviewer: Who's the target audience? End-users, or component developers?

Author: Good point -- covering both to some extent makes sense. The initial version was more for end-users.

## Configuration

> The Collector does not contain an embedded or default configuration and MUST

Reviewer: Actually... the docker image does come with a default configuration file, and there's an issue about adding a default config file to the collector: https://github.com/open-telemetry/opentelemetry-collector/issues/886

Author: Agreed -- my point was the binary does not have an embedded one today though packaging may include one. Also, this should change in the future and then this doc needs to be updated. I figured reflecting the current world made sense. Let me try to clarify and even link to known next steps so people are aware

passed to the Collector MUST be validated prior to be loaded. If an invalid
configuration is detected, the Collector MUST fail to start as a protective
mechanism.

The configuration drives the Collector's behavior and care should be taken to
ensure the configuration only enables the minimum set of capabilities and as
such exposes the minimum set of required ports. In addition, any incoming or
outgoing communication SHOULD leverage TLS and/or authentication.

The Collector keeps the configuration in memory, but where the configuration is
loaded from at start time depends on the packaging used. For example, in
Kubernetes secrets and configmaps CAN be leveraged. In comparison, the Docker
image embeds the configuration in the container where is it not stored in an
encrypted manner by default.

The configuration MAY contain sensitive information including:

- Authentication information such as API tokens
- TLS certificates including private keys

Sensitive information SHOULD be stored securely such as on an encrypted
filesystem or secret store. Environment variable CAN be used to handle
sensitive and non-sensitive data as the Collector MUST support environment

> variable expansion.

Reviewer 2: If an end-user is reading this to learn how to set up a certain component I think they would benefit from a link to [this docs section](https://opentelemetry.io/docs/collector/configuration/#configuration-environment-variables) to see how this is done in practice. Not sure if a link is appropriate here though, this sounds more like a spec for Collector developers.

More information about configuration is provided in the following sections.

## Permissions

The Collector supports running as a custom user and SHOULD NOT be run as a
root/admin user. For the majority of use-cases, the Collector SHOULD NOT require
privileged access to function. Some components MAY require privileged access
and care should be taken before enabling these components. Collector components
MAY require external permissions including network access or RBAC access.

More information about permissions is provided in the following sections.

## Receivers and Exporters

Receivers and Exporters can be either push or pull-based. In either case, the
connection established SHOULD be over a secure and authenticated channel.
Unused receivers and exporters SHOULD be disabled to minimize the attack vector
of the Collector. Receivers and exporters MUST default to TLS connections (via

> the `insecure: False` configuration setting).

Reviewer: ```suggestion
the `insecure: false` configuration setting).
```

This is the default value anyway.

> Receivers and Exporters MAY expose buffer, queue, payload, and/or worker

Reviewer: Expose how? Via config parameters? Or read-only via metrics/expvars?

settings. If these settings are available, care should be taken before
modifying the default values. Improperly setting these values may expose the
Collector to additional attack vectors including resource exhaustion.

> It is possible that a receiver MAY require the Collector run in a privileged
> mode in order to operate, which could be a security concern, but today this
> is not the case.

## Processors

Processors sit between receivers and exporters. They are responsible for
processing the data in some way. From a security perspective, they are useful
in a couple ways.

### Scrubbing sensitive data

> It is common for a Collector to be used to scrub sensitive data before

Reviewer 3: Just noting here that scrubbing or obfuscation processors for spans with sensitive information in attributes (such as `db.statement`: https://github.com/open-telemetry/opentelemetry-specification/blob/1afab39e5658f807315abf2f3256809293bfd421/specification/trace/semantic_conventions/database.md#call-level-attributes) are going to become an increasingly common request and/or use case.  We may want to consider where having default obfuscation or scrubbing of known sensitive attributes lands on the roadmap

Author: True, let me add some words around this

exporting it to a backend. This is especially important when sending the data
to a third-party backend.

### Safeguards around resource utilization

In addition, processors offer safeguards around resource utilization. The
`batch` and especially `memory_limiter` processor help ensure that the

> Collector is resource efficient and does not OOM when overloaded. At least

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Collector is resource efficient and does not run out of memory when overloaded. At least
```

> these two processors SHOULD be enabled on every defined pipeline.

Reviewer 2: An useful link here for end-users would be [the description on recommended processor order in the pipelines](https://github.com/open-telemetry/opentelemetry-collector/tree/main/processor).

Author: Good call let me add some pointers

# Security

The OpenTelemetry Collector defaults to operating in a secure manner, but is
configuration driven. This document captures important security aspects and

> considerations for the Collector. This document is intended for both end-users

Reviewer: A follow-up task could be to add this to the website, or as a blog post. Having a single doc for both end-users and component developers might be confusing to end-users.

Author: Agreed -- the immediate goal is to close out the AWS security issues filed in contrib, but I plan to take a full pass on collector documentation and move stuff like this to the website.

and component developers. It assumes at least a basic understanding of the
Collector architecture and functionality.

> Note: Please review the [configuration
> documentation](https://opentelemetry.io/docs/collector/configuration/)
> prior to this security document.

## TL;DR

### End-users

- Configuration
  - SHOULD only enable the minimum required components
  - SHOULD ensure sensitive configuration information is stored securely
- Permissions
  - SHOULD not run Collector as root/admin user
  - MAY require privileged access for some components
- Receivers/Exporters

>   - SHOULD use encryption and authentication

Reviewer: I wrote a blog post some time ago on this, and it's available under the OpenTelemetry publication. Perhaps it could be linked here?

https://medium.com/opentelemetry/securing-your-opentelemetry-collector-1a4f9fa5bd6f

Author: Nice post! Absolutely.

functions](https://github.com/open-telemetry/opentelemetry-collector/tree/main/config).

More information about configuration is provided in the following sections.

## Permissions

The Collector supports running as a custom user and SHOULD NOT be run as a
root/admin user. For the majority of use-cases, the Collector SHOULD NOT require
privileged access to function. Some components MAY require privileged access
and care should be taken before enabling these components. Collector components
MAY require external permissions including network access or RBAC.

Component developers SHOULD minimize privileged access requirements and MUST
document what requires privileged access and why.

More information about permissions is provided in the following sections.

## Receivers and Exporters

Receivers and Exporters can be either push or pull-based. In either case, the
connection established SHOULD be over a secure and authenticated channel.
Unused receivers and exporters SHOULD be disabled to minimize the attack vector
of the Collector.

Receivers and Exporters MAY expose buffer, queue, payload, and/or worker
settings via configuration parameters. If these settings are available, care

> should be taken before modifying the default values. Improperly setting these

Reviewer: @jstickler would probably say: "care should be taken" by whom?

Reviewer 4: @jpkrohling   I see that I've taught you well!  👍

Author: Good call -- will fix.
